Internationalization (i18n)
===========================

.. seealso::

   :doc:`preferences` for Internationalization (i18n)

Treat the source language as "developer" English, using the language code ``en_US``. Then, use Transifex to translate the "developer" English to "proper" English, using the language code ``en``.

.. note::

   If using the source language as "proper" English, then replace ``en_US`` with ``en`` in the commands and templates below.

Reference: `Non-English as a Source Language <https://help.transifex.com/en/articles/6240900-non-english-as-a-source-language>`__

Mark strings to translate
-------------------------

When using Django, use its `translation functions and template tags <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/topics/i18n/translation/>`__. Otherwise, use `gettext.gettext() <https://docs.python.org/3/library/gettext.html>`__.

.. seealso::

   :ref:`Internationalization (i18n) string formatting <string-logging-i18n>`

Configure message extraction
----------------------------

When using Django, this step is already done. Otherwise, create a `pyproject.toml file <https://babel.pocoo.org/en/latest/messages.html#extraction-method-mapping-and-configuration>`__, for example:

.. code-block:: toml

   [[tool.babel.mappings]]
   method = "python"
   pattern = "**.py"

   [[tool.babel.mappings]]
   method = "jinja2"
   pattern = "**.html"

Add the Transifex mapping
-------------------------

See `Adding resources in bulk <https://developers.transifex.com/docs/cli#adding-resources-in-bulk>`__.

.. note::

   For reference, the equivalent with the old Python Transifex Client, replacing ``TXPROJECT`` and ``APP``, was:

   .. code-block:: bash

      tx config mapping -r TXPROJECT.django -f APP/locale/en_US/LC_MESSAGES/django.po -s en_US -t PO 'APP/locale/<lang>/LC_MESSAGES/django.po'

Translate with Transifex
------------------------

Whenever text in the interface is added or updated, you must extract the strings to translate from the code files into PO files by running:

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Django

   django-admin makemessages -l en_US --no-obsolete

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Python (example)

   pybabel extract -F pyproject.toml -o messages.pot .
   pybabel update -N -i messages.pot -d locale

Then, push the PO files to Transifex with:

.. code-block:: bash

   tx push -s

If you made local changes to translations, push the translations to Transifex. For example:

.. code-block:: bash

   tx push -t -l en

When ready, pull the translations from Transifex with:

.. code-block:: bash

   tx pull -f -a

Then, compile the PO files to MO files with:

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Django

   python manage.py compilemessages

.. code-block:: bash
   :caption: Python (example)

   pybabel compile -f -d locale

Reference: Django `Translation <https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/4.2/topics/i18n/translation/>`__

.. _i18n-ci:

Continuous integration
----------------------

Repositories that support multiple locales should test that translation files are complete. To do that, the workflow extracts messages, updates catalogs, and then counts incomplete translations.

.. note::

   These workflows only run on ``push`` for the ``main`` branch, so that feature branches don't fail until a PR is created.

Create a ``.github/workflows/i18n.yml`` file.

For a Django application, use the following. Change the ``python-version`` to match the version used to compile the :doc:`requirements_dev.txt file<requirements>`.

.. literalinclude:: ../../cookiecutter-django/{{cookiecutter.project_slug}}/.github/workflows/i18n.yml
   :language: yaml

For a Babel project, adapt:

.. literalinclude:: samples/i18n/babel.yml
   :language: yaml

.. warning::

   If your default branch is not named ``main``, edit the ``push:`` key.

.. note::

   If you use the ``jinja2`` extractor, install ``jinja2`` with ``pip``.
